A computer system consists of hardware and systems software that work together
to run application programs. Specific implementations of systems change over
time, but the underlying concepts do not. All computer systems have similar
hardware and software components that perform similar functions.
Figure 1.1. The hello program

#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
    printf("hello, world\n");
    return 0;
}

Our hello program begins life as a source program (or source file) that the
programmer creates with an editor and saves in a text file called hello.c. The
source program is a sequence of bits, each with a value of 0 or 1, organized
in 8-bit chunks called bytes. Each byte represents some text character in the
program. Files such as hello.c that consist exclusively of ASCII characters
are known as text files. All other files are known as binary files.

1.2. Programs are translated by other programs into different forms

On a Unix system, the translation from source file to object file is performed
by a compiler driver:

Figure 1.3 The compilation system

hello.c (source program, text) -> preprocessor -> hello.i (modified source program) -> compiler -> hello.s (Assembly program (text)) -> assembler -> (printf.o, hello.o) (relocatable object programs, binary) -> linker -> hello (executable object program (binary))

Preprocessing phase. The preprocessor (cpp) modifies the original C program
according to directives that begin with the # character. For example, the
#include <stdio.h> command in line 1 of hello.c tells the preprocessor
to read the contents of the system header file stdio.h and insert it directly
into the program text. The result is another C program, typically with the .i
suffix.
. Compilation phase. The compiler (cc1) translates the text file hello.i into
the text file hello.s, which contains an assembly-language program. Each
statement in an assembly-language program exactly describes one low-level
machine-language instruction in a standard text form. Assembly language is
useful because it provides a common output language for different compilers
for different high-level languages. For example, C compilers and Fortran
compilers both generate output files in the same assembly language.
. Assembly phase. Next, the assembler (as) translates hello.s into machine-
language instructions, packages them in a form known as a relocatable object
program, and stores the result in the object file hello.o. The hello.o file is
a binary file whose bytes encode machine language instructions rather than
characters. If we were to view hello.o with a text editor, it would appear to
be gibberish.
. Linking phase.Notice that our hello program calls the printf function, which
is part of the standard C library provided by every C compiler. The printf
function resides in a separate precompiled object file called printf.o, which
must somehow be merged with our hello.o program. The linker (ld) handles
this merging. The result is the hello file, which is an executable object file (or
simply executable) that is ready to be loaded into memory and executed by
the system.

1.3. It pays to understand how compilation systems work

Optimizing program performance. Modern compilers are sophisticated tools
that usually produce good code. As programmers, we do not need to know
the inner workings of the compiler in order to write efficient code. However,
in order to make good coding decisions in our C programs, we do need a
basic understanding of machine-level code and how the compiler translates
different C statements into machine code. For example, is a switch statement
always more efficient than a sequence of if-else statements? How much
overhead is incurred by a function call? Is a while loop more efficient than
a for loop? Are pointer references more efficient than array indexes? Why
does our loop run so much faster if we sum into a local variable instead of an
argument that is passed by reference? How can a function run faster when we
simply rearrange the parentheses in an arithmetic expression?

Understanding link-time errors. In our experience, some of the most perplex-
ing programming errors are related to the operation of the linker, especially
when you are trying to build large software systems. For example, what does
it mean when the linker reports that it cannot resolve a reference? What is the
difference between a static variable and a global variable? What happens if
you define two global variables in different C files with the same name? What
is the difference between a static library and a dynamic library? Why does it
matter what order we list libraries on the command line? And scariest of all,
why do some linker-related errors not appear until run time? You will learn
the answers to these kinds of questions in Chapter 7.

Avoiding security holes. For many years, buffer overflow vulnerabilities have
accounted for the majority of security holes in network and Internet servers.
These vulnerabilities exist because too few programmers understand the need
to carefully restrict the quantity and forms of data they accept from untrusted
sources.

1.4 Processes Read and interpret instructions stored in memory
The shell is a command-line interpreter that prints a prompt, waits for you to type a
command line, and then performs the command.

1.4.1 Hardware Organization of a system

To understand what happens to our hello program when we run it, we need
to understand the hardware organization of a typical system, which is shown in
Figure 1.4. This particular picture is modeled after the family of Intel Pentium
systems, but all systems have a similar look and feel.

(Figure 1.4. is in the CS:APP book)

Buses:
Running throughout the system is a collection of electrical conduits called buses
that carry bytes of information back and forth between the components. Buses
are typically designed to transfer fixed-sized chunks of bytes known as words. The
number of bytes in a word (the word size) is a fundamental system parameter that
varies across systems. Most machines today have word sizes of either 4 bytes (32
bits) or 8 bytes (64 bits). For the sake of our discussion here, we will assume a word
size of 4 bytes, and we will assume that buses transfer only one word at a time.

I/O Devices:
Input/output (I/O) devices are the system’s connection to the external world. Our
example system has four I/O devices: a keyboard and mouse for user input, a
display for user output, and a disk drive (or simply disk) for long-term storage of
data and programs. Initially, the executable hello program resides on the disk.
Each I/O device is connected to the I/O bus by either a controller or an adapter.
The distinction between the two is mainly one of packaging. Controllers are chip
sets in the device itself or on the system’s main printed circuit board (often called
the motherboard). An adapter is a card that plugs into a slot on the motherboard.
Regardless, the purpose of each is to transfer information back and forth between
the I/O bus and an I/O device.

Main Memory:
The main memory is a temporary storage device that holds both a program and
the data it manipulates while the processor is executing the program. Physically,
main memory consists of a collection of dynamic random access memory (DRAM)
chips. Logically, memory is organized as a linear array of bytes, each with its own
unique address (array index) starting at zero.

Processor:
The central processing unit (or CPU), or simply processor, is the engine that executes
instructions stored in main memory. At its core is a word-size storage device, called
the register file, and a program counter (PC). The processor operates under some
execution model called the instruction set architecture (or ISA).
Here
are some examples of the simple operations that the CPU might carry out at the
request of an instruction:

Load: Copy a byte or a word from main memory into a register, overwriting
the previous contents of the register.

Store: Copy a byte or a word from a register to a location in main memory,
overwriting the previous contents of that location.

Operate: Copy the contents of two registers to the ALU, perform an arithmetic
operation on the two words, and store the result in a register, overwriting the
previous contents of that register.

Jump: Extract a word from the instruction itself and copy that word into the
program counter (PC), overwriting the previous value of the PC.

1.4.2 Running the hello program

Initially, the shell program is executing its instructions, waiting for us to type a
command. As we type the characters ./hello at the keyboard, the shell program
reads each one into a register and then stores it in memory.
When we hit the enter key on the keyboard, the shell knows that we have
finished typing the command. The shell then loads the executable hello file by
executing a sequence of instructions that copies the code and data in the hello
object file from disk to main memory. The data includes the string of characters
hello, world\n that will eventually be printed out.

1.5 Caches Matter

There are a lot of copying operations involved in the hello program, much of it
is slowing down what we want to be done in other larger programs. Thus,
system designers came up with faster, and smaller storage devices called cache
memories, placed between the processor and the main memory, and copies frequently
used data so future accesses can be served faster than the slow retrievals
from main memory.

1.6 Storage Devices Form a Hierarchy

This notion of inserting a smaller, faster storage device (e.g., cache memory)
between the processor and a larger, slower device (e.g., main memory) turns out
to be a general idea. In fact, the storage devices in every computer system are
organized as a memory hierarchy similar to Figure 1.9. As we move from the top
of the hierarchy to the bottom, the devices become slower, larger, and less costly
per byte. The register file occupies the top level in the hierarchy, which is known
as level 0 or L0. We show three levels of caching L1 to L3, occupying memory
hierarchy levels 1 to 3. Main memory occupies level 4, and so on.
The main idea of a memory hierarchy is that storage at one level serves as a
cache for storage at the next lower level. Thus, the register file is a cache for the
L1 cache. Caches L1 and L2 are caches for L2 and L3, respectively. The L3 cache
is a cache for the main memory, which is a cache for the disk. On some networked
systems with distributed file systems, the local disk serves as a cache for data stored
on the disks of other systems.

Definition of cache memory: a fast, small storage layer located between the processor
and main memory. It stores frequently used data, so the processor can retrieve it faster
than main memory.

1.7 The Operating System Manages the Hardware

Back to our hello example. When the shell loaded and ran the hello program,
and when the hello program printed its message, neither program accessed the
keyboard, display, disk, or main memory directly. Rather, they relied on the
services provided by the operating system. We can think of the operating system as
a layer of software interposed between the application program and the hardware,
as shown in Figure 1.10. All attempts by an application program to manipulate the
hardware must go through the operating system.
The operating system has two primary purposes: (1) to protect the hardware
from misuse by runaway applications and (2) to provide applications with simple
and uniform mechanisms for manipulating complicated and often wildly different
low-level hardware devices. The operating system achieves both goals via the
fundamental abstractions shown in Figure 1.11: processes, virtual memory, and
files. As this figure suggests, files are abstractions for I/O devices, virtual memory
is an abstraction for both the main memory and disk I/O devices, and processes
are abstractions for the processor, main memory, and I/O devices. We will discuss
each in turn.

1.7.1 Processes

When a program such as hello runs on a modern system, the operating system
provides the illusion that the program is the only one running on the system. The
program appears to have exclusive use of both the processor, main memory, and
I/O devices. The processor appears to execute the instructions in the program, one
after the other, without interruption. And the code and data of the program appear
to be the only objects in the system’s memory. These illusions are provided by the
notion of a process, one of the most important and successful ideas in computer
science.

A process is the operating system’s abstraction for a running program.
Traditional systems could only execute one program at a time, while newer multi-
core processors can execute several programs simultaneously. In either case, a
single CPU can appear to execute multiple processes concurrently by having the
processor switch among them. The operating system performs this interleaving
with a mechanism known as context switching.

The operating system keeps track of all the state information that the process
needs in order to run. This state, which is known as the context, includes informa-
tion such as the current values of the PC, the register file, and the contents of main
memory. At any point in time, a uniprocessor system can only execute the code
for a single process. When the operating system decides to transfer control from
the current process to some new process, it performs a context switch by saving
the context of the current process, restoring the context of the new process, and
then passing control to the new process.

As Figure 1.12 indicates, the transition from one process to another is man-
aged by the operating system kernel. The kernel is the portion of the operating
system code that is always resident in memory. When an application program
requires some action by the operating system, such as to read or write a file, it
executes a special system call instruction, transferring control to the kernel. The
kernel then performs the requested operation and returns back to the application
program. Note that the kernel is not a separate process. Instead, it is a collection
of code and data structures that the system uses to manage all the processes.

Kernel: A kernel is a core software program that runs with absolute hardware privileges,
remaining permanently resident in main memory (RAM) to manage system resources and
mediate interaction between user application processes and the underlying physical hardware.

1.7.2 Threads

Although we normally think of a process as having a single control flow, in modern
systems a process can actually consist of multiple execution units, called threads,
each running in the context of the process and sharing the same code and global
data.
A thread is a single sequential flow of execution within a process.

1.7.3 Virtual Memory

Virtual memory is an abstraction that provides each process with the illusion that it
has exclusive use of the main memory. Each process has the same uniform view of
memory, which is known as its virtual address space.
The virtual address space seen by each process consists of a number of well-
defined areas, each with a specific purpose.

Program data and code,
Heap,
Shared Libraries,
Stack,
Kernel virtual memory.

1.7.4 Files

A file is a sequence of bytes, nothing more and nothing less. Every I/O device,
including disks, keyboards, displays, and even networks, is modeled as a file. All
input and output in the system is performed by reading and writing files, using a
small set of system calls known as Unix I/O.
This simple and elegant notion of a file is nonetheless very powerful because
it provides applications with a uniform view of all the varied I/O devices that
might be contained in the system.
